[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Unhappy in Brazil,
Bohm traveled to Israel,
where he accepted a position
at the Technion in Haifa.
While in Israel, Bohm
also met and married
the woman who was to become
his lifelong partner, Sarah
Woolfson.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> David had been exiled
to Brazil after the House
Un-American Activities business.
And he was never happy there.
There were many
problems, he felt.
And then he was offered
an opportunity in Israel.
And of course, it was a
new state at the time.
And also, of course,
he was Jewish.
Maybe he saw this as
a good opportunity.
And he'd only been
there a couple of weeks
when he was invited to a party.
And Saral was present.
And she spotted him
from across the room
and immediately was
interested in this young man.
I would describe Saral as
a very motherly person.
She wanted to look after people.
She liked to feed people.
She was very sociable
and including everyone.
>> My wife and I used to
go to the public library.
And she discovered a
book by Krishnamurti.
And she read in there
the words of the observer
and the observed.
And I had been interested
in that because, in quantum
mechanics, that is a key
question, in the sense that,
because of this
undivided wholeness,
the two cannot be separated.
>> And she opened the book,
and in it immediately saw
references to things with
regard to the observer
and the observed.
And she was startled
because that's what David
was working with in physics.
And Saral is trying to
understand how could this
be that this Indian
philosopher is also
talking about the
observer and the observed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> From Israel, Bohm
moved to Bristol.
And it was here that
his fundamental ideas
on the nature of reality
began to take fresh impetus.
In Bristol, Bohm left his
hidden variable ideas behind,
and was now focusing on the fact
that, despite decades of work,
physicists had been unable
to reconcile quantum theory
with Einstein's relativity.
>> He's left behind
his hidden variables.
He's left that
behind, and now he's
asking, why has there
been decades of work
on relativity and
quantum theory,
the two key theories of
physics, why are there two?
Why is it not just one theory,
one unified theory, as Einstein
had hoped there would be?
And so he's wondering,
do we need a new theory?
Is that the core issue?
Or is a completely new order
to physics, a new approach?
And that was what he
began to think about, what
he called the implicate order.
We need a radically new order.
So that was where his thinking
was when he arrived in Britain.
>> At this time, Bohm also
developed a new interest that
was to have a deep impact
on his life and his approach
to science.
As we have seen,
quantum physics has long
been concerned with the process
of wave function observation.
And Bohm was very much
aware that, depending
on the conditions
of an experiment,
that electrons would behave
differently depending
on what was being observed.
>> When I was younger, I
felt that, in the beginning,
that science would surely be a
source of benefiting mankind.
And I had no question about it.
I began to feel that
something beyond science
would be needed to
approach this question,
you see, that science
alone could not
guarantee that it would be
used for benefiting mankind,
the scientific impulse.
In the beginning, I thought
it would, just truth alone.
Then I began to look into
philosophy, Eastern and Western
and so on, and some people
with religious ideas.
I mean, just simply looking
at it when I was in Bristol,
in England.
>> In quantum physics, in
the study of the behavior
of the electron, you had this
very mysterious property that
your act of observing the
electron changes it in such
a way that there's a link
between the apparatus
of observation and
what is observed.
And Krishnamurti made a
similar statement about events
in the psychological
field, which
is that the act of
observing something
inwardly, some emotion or
some attitude or whatever,
the very seeing
of it changes it,
so that the inward sense of an
observer, myself, who's looking
is inextricably connected
with whatever I'm looking at.
And so Krishnamurti
expressed that
in sort of an
aphoristic fashion,
by saying the observer
is the observed.
>> Which, in essence, took
the questions that David was
working with in physics and
flipped them into the human
realm--
the realm of human experience,
human life, human difficulties.
David felt that Krishnamurti
was on to something
of great importance
that could help
to complete the
sense of wholeness
that he was trying to bring to
light with his work in physics.
>> Krishnamurti's approach
aligned with Bohm's own views
on the nature of
thought, of reality,
and on the nature of
consciousness, in particular,
seen as a coherent whole which
is never static or complete,
but a continuous process
of enfolding and unfolding.
Both Bohm and
Krishnamurti questioned
their respective backgrounds,
ultimately rejecting
the orthodoxy they had once
felt would provide answers
to humanity's big questions.
>> In his early life, he
was kind of adopted by this
organization called the
Theosophical Society,
which discovered him when he was
a 14-year-old boy on the beach
in South India.
And they predicted
that he was going
to become this great what
they called world teacher,
and bring a new kind of
consciousness to mankind.
And they cultivated him and
nourished him in this role.
But somewhere about the age
of 25, 27, maybe a little
bit earlier than that, he
began to seriously question
all of this, and find
it very limiting,
similarly to the way Bohm had
found the scientific orthodoxy
to be limiting.
>> So Bohm wanted
to meet this man.
And they had this meeting,
and I'm told partway
through it Krishnamurti was
supposed to have stood up
with pleasure or
enthusiasm or whatever,
and said you have seen it,
sir, so that Bohm had seen it.
And then Bohm began to have
more meetings with Krishnamurti.
He became a trustee of
Krishnamurti's school
at Brockwood Park.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was at Brockwood Park that
Bohm and Krishnamurti entered
into a series of conversations
whose themes covered the ending
of time, the nature
of mind, cosmic order,
and much more over
a 25-year period.
>> And from Krishnamurti's
perspective,
it was very important for him
because he felt as though he
had a tremendous reservoir
of insights to share with
the world, but he felt like he
couldn't necessarily bring it
out by himself.
He needed people to ask him.
He needed people to dig
and to question him.
And of all the people he ever
met, Bohm was the best at that.
And I think Bohm,
to some extent,
formed a similar function
for Krishnamurti,
because Krishnamurti could raise
questions with him that might
not occur in another context.
>> Grief is not my grief.
Grief is human.
>> Yes, now but how are
to people to see that?
Because a person
feeling grief feels
that it's his grief, you--
[CHUCKLES] I mean,
doesn't that seem right?
>> Yes, sir.
I think it is because
partly of our education,
partly our society, tradition.
>> But it's also implicit in
our whole way of thinking.
>> Yeah.
Oh, [INAUDIBLE].
Quite right.
So--
>> And we have to
jump out of that.
>> Yes.
>> But perhaps we can see
that love is not personal.
Love does not belong
to anybody, any more
than any other quality does.
>> Earth is not English
Earth or French Earth.
Earth is Earth.
>> You see?
And I was thinking of
an example in physics
that, if a scientist
or chemist is studying
an element such as sodium, it's
not that he studies his sodium,
and somebody else
studies his sodium,
and they somehow compare notes.
>> Quite, quite, quite.
Sodium is sodium.
>> Sodium is sodium universally.
>> Yes.
>> And if we have to say love
is love universally, right?
Essentially, the point
made by Krishnamurti
was that the problems
of mankind originate
in thought itself, in
consciousness itself, you see?
And as previous to
that, I had grown up
believing that poverty was
the main problem of mankind,
and science would help
me eliminate that.
And I could see that no
matter how far science went,
it probably wouldn't.
And even if it did,
it wouldn't really
solve-- it wouldn't
really make mankind happy.
>> I remember I once
asked Bohm, I said, well,
what do you think, what's
the main contribution
of Krishnamurti?
And if I remember
it correctly, Bohm
said something like that
Krishnamurti kind of pointed
out that thought is an
actual movement in our lives.
It's a physical movement,
physiological movement.
And it has a tremendous power.
It's behind almost
all our problems.
>> And we have to give attention
to that manner in which thought
is participating and shaping
what we observe in order
to understand how our
whole mind is working,
especially with respect to
conflicts which occur between
you and me, between my
country and another country,
and also the conflicts
which occur inwardly.
>> And there, then, of course,
Krishnamurti was suggesting
that, if you are
able to be quiet,
the deeper layers of reality
might open up for you.
>> So in that state of mind,
the mind is not just blank.
You know, I'm not
doing anything.
It's very active.
The thinking
process doesn't have
to do with thought or
recognition or knowledge,
but it's in a state of
just perception, awareness,
attention.
Maybe you could even say
receptivity to truth.
>> There might have been
many reasons Bohm was drawn
to Krishnamurti.
The ones that are
apparent to me,
Bohm perceived the
wholeness of life.
He perceived life as
one indivisible whole,
including nature,
including consciousness.
And in Krishnamurti,
he found someone
who also had this notion.
>> Krishnamurti, who
was actually addressing
the separation of the observer
and the observed in the same
way as the wholeness in
quantum theory was saying,
you can't make a separation
between the system that
you're looking at
and the apparatus,
which was the old
traditional way of doing it,
that somehow these
things formed a whole.
But rather than saying
you can't develop concepts
for it, what David was trying
to do was to develop concepts.
Now, to develop
those concepts you
can't develop within
the scientific context.
You've got to go outside
to a wider set of concepts.
And he found in
Krishnamurti a way
of discussing this
more general question.
>> I remember one day
we were here in Italy,
and he said to me, do you think
I should give up doing physics
and just devote myself
to Krishnamurti?
And my reply was
kind of, fish exist
outside the goldfish bowl.
But that was it.
He was that extreme,
that maybe he
should devote himself
completely to having
his own brain transformed.
>> Having settled
permanently in the UK,
it was while at Birkbeck College
in London that Bohm formed one
of the most enduring science
partnerships of his life with
physicist Basil Hiley.
And he also had an unexpected
and welcome encounter
with a forgotten theory.
And that encounter
changed everything.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> At that time, David Bohm was
developing a new idea which was
called structured process, that
basically we want to start with
process.
Not particles
moving in spacetime,
but a process from which
both particles and spacetime
can emerge.
Very radical ideas.
Chris Dewdney and Chris
Phillipidis came up to me
and said, why don't you
talk about the '52 paper?
And that's when I
said, mm, uh, mm,
uh, because I think it's wrong.
And that's when Chris
said to me, Basil,
have you read the paper?
And I then had to
agree that I hadn't.
>> It had been decades since
the physics orthodoxy had
blackballed Bohm and
his hidden variables.
It would take a new
team of mavericks
to unearth this critical
work and resurrect it
for a new generation.
>> Well, I got to know David
Bohm quite well when I was
a lecturer at Birkbeck College.
We had many very
interesting discussions,
and Bohm was somebody
who I got a lot from.
I always thought that he was
very much like a wave function
himself, that you'd
ask a question,
you see, a very
specific question.
And he would be very focused and
give you a deep, very focused
answer to that question.
And then it would
start to spread out,
and it would encompass a
little more about physics,
and then it spread, and
then about philology,
and about human
nature, and so on.
And I'd get a bit lost
about what's going on,
so I'd need another question.
I'd ask him another
question, and then woomph.
The conversation would
focus itself very deeply
on this particular point.
And he would give a very
succinct answer to that,
and then again he would
spread out like this.
So it's just the way a wave
functions as you measure it,
it's the particle here.
And woomph, you see?
And then it spreads
out again, like this.
>> They'd finally developed
sufficient computing power
needed to run the complex
mathematics required
to describe Bohm's
hidden variables.
>> I think it'd be a very
valuable thing if we could show
clearly how Bohm's '52 theory
worked in the two slits
experiment, because obviously,
the two slits experiment is
the iconic experiment in the
interpretation of quantum
theory.
And so Basil went off
and read the papers.
I set about calculating the
particle trajectories for this.
And Chris Phillipidis produced
the quantum potential picture.
>> And that's what Chris was
an absolute master at, was
actually developing computer
programs to actually simulate
this, and let's have a look
at what is going on here.
>> When we put the
two together, I mean,
we were initially I think quite
staggered by how amazing this
story was, which had never
been told in any sort of clear,
detailed way.
>> And there was a trajectory
for the two slits experiment.
Wow.
>> You could actually see in the
images that reproduced exactly
how you could have particle
trajectories in the two slits
experiment and account for
interference, something,
of course, which is forbidden
in normal quantum theory.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You could actually see how
the thing worked exactly.
You could follow
individual particles
as it was affected by this
potential through space,
and consequentially
would guide particles
into the bright
interference fringes.
>> Wherever there was a dip
in the quantum potential--
that's the rate of change of a
potential, which is a force--
and the trajectories would
jump across the ditch.
And when they were
on the plateaus,
they would just come straight.
And the end result
was a gathering
of these trajectories
which explained completely
the interference pattern.
>> There was a physicist,
Franco Selleri,
who was particularly supportive
of this work once he'd learned
about it.
And he referred to these movies
as the hard porn of physics,
in a sense, because they would
be censored by the orthodoxy.
You shouldn't be able
to see this stuff,
and yet here we were
projecting it in front of them.
>> At that stage, when
Dave was still alive,
he saw these trajectories
and this quantum potential,
and his eyes actually lit up
because he had not seen them.
He'd written about them,
but he had not seen them.
And then we started discussing
the quantum potential,
what could it mean.
And this quantum
potential energy
only functions when
quantum phenomena appear.
That is, in the particle
approaching two slits,
it is the quantum
potential that organizes
the way the individual
trajectories work.
So there is a
dynamic whole process
going on in which the
quantum potential appears.
>> If you're looking at
interpretations or ways
of looking at quantum mechanics,
my view is that probably
the Bohm-Hiley way of looking at
quantum mechanics has the most
satisfactory ontology.
So you have a picture of
what constitutes reality
without changing
quantum mechanics.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Bohmian theory made
a clear prediction about
the nonlocality of the world.
What is nonlocality?
Nonlocality is really, to
put it in simple words,
the profound discovery
of the interconnectedness
of the universe at the
fundamental level of quantum.
Now, that conflicts deeply right
away with relativity theory,
where it says, no, the
speed of light is limited.
Everything is local.
Nothing can travel faster
than the speed of light,
so how could everything
be instantaneously
interconnected in the universe?
And that's the big clash
that we have today.
And that's why also Bohm's
theory of hidden variables,
which are nonlocal, has really
been rejected from the start.
>> It seems strange to us.
And I stress the word seems.
But if we want to make sense
of a theory, that matters also.
And sometimes when a theory
seems strange, we get past it.
And other times when
it seems strange,
it's pointing us to
something that we
haven't understood well enough.
>> It really says that
there exists a hidden regime
of reality in which
everything is interconnected,
but no person,
even in the future,
will be able to access
that domain and control it.
So this is also what
the mystical traditions
tell us, that we must be
humble in front of reality,
that there will always be
domains of reality that
will remain beyond science,
beyond the scientific method,
will remain beyond access
by scientific agents.
And if the quantum potential
is discovered in this way
and nonlocality is proven, then
the existence of that domain
is proven.
>> Remember, we're
talking about wholeness.
We have to have
wholeness in here.
Here, we agree with Bohm.
Bohm pointed out that it was
very important the new feature
that quantum mechanics
introduces is a kind
of wholeness, which means
we cannot analyze things
by cutting them up into little
bits as we do in classical
physics.
But what we can do is, if we
want to try and cut it up,
that the way one bit
goes into the next bit
actually involves
unfolding into the whole
and then enfolding back again
into a particular region.
And so you get this idea
of unfolding, enfolding,
unfolding, enfolding.
So what looks like a continuous
trajectory is actually a series
of foldings and unfoldings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I tried to get some idea of
what might be the process which
was implied by the mathematics
of the quantum theory.
And this process is
what I call enfoldment,
that the mathematics
itself suggests
a movement in which
everything in which
any particular
element of space may
have a field which
unfolds into the whole,
and the whole enfolds into it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What David and I have done
is to open up the discussion,
which I find, when I'm
talking to young people,
that they're very interested in
trying to proceed further with
these ideas.
In other words, some
of them have actually
got it, as I put it.
They know in their
basic feelings
that this is an
interesting way to go.
>> The lab at University
College London is at the center
of experiments to prove the
existence of the quantum
potential.
>> If the quantum potential
exists in this way,
then that really is the first
evidence for the profound
interconnectedness of the
physical universe at a very
deep, fundamental level.
That would revolutionize
our scientific worldview.
It would validate those
views of unification,
those views that speak to
the wholism of the universe.
And it truly would
be a confirmation
of a kind of wholism that
religions and spiritual systems
and mystical systems have
intuited for many centuries,
and millennia, even.
>> So what does all this mean
for you, for me, the universe,
and everything?
Bohm suggests that, out of
perceived emptiness, out
of the so-called vacuum state,
particles interact with,
respond to, and are informed by
an information potential which
allows the cosmos to emerge.
>> So it's the information
informing action of the quantum
potential that makes it possible
for the physical universe
to be.
>> Everything we know and
everything we will come to know
is already information waiting
to unfold into manifest
reality.
It's the implicate waiting
to become explicate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We aren't just
things in space.
We are places of transformation.
And furthermore, our
relationship with others,
but with all
phenomena, is very much
a question of our
relative positions.
And I think that was something
else that really deeply
affected me about Bohm's
work, the participant
nature of the observer
in the emerging of what
we call reality.
The way that Quantum
Cloud works is
that you are the
determiner of what you see.
This is a mess of
I think elements
that are both particles
and, hopefully, trajectories
that come together.
And depending on where your
position is, either in a boat
or walking along the
side of the Thames,
and depending on
the time of day,
you will see or not see
the possibility of a body.
Quantum physics invites us to be
participators in that emerging
of a world.
And it has very,
very fundamental,
I think, both
philosophical, spiritual,
and political implications,
which are essentially
that each of us is a co-producer
of a world, that each of us
is a co-producer of
a possible future.
The work of people
like Einstein and Bohm,
they are like huge windows
opening in the imagination
to a way of dealing
with life and the things
we encounter within it
freshly and, in a sense,
with the right level
of uncertainty.
>> The present ego
identity is based, I think,
on a wrong mode of
thought, you see,
in which a person identifies
with his thoughts and with his
body and with things, you see,
which means that he's creating
an illusion, that this self
which people feel they have is
only a show.
It's not really there.
But it is such a convincing
show that everybody
acts as if it were
there, and that
gives it an apparent reality.
One of the most essential
points of the scientific spirit
is to acknowledge the fact, or
the interpretation of the fact,
whether you like it
or not, that is not
to engage in wishful thinking
or not to reject something
because you don't like it.
>> Is it possible scientifically
to define this wholeness?
>> Well, not really.
Wholeness is an attitude or
an approach, but it can be,
given a scientific
realization, you see--
>> I think two levels,
interdependency.
Firstly, external things,
different nations,
different country,
environment, and human beings,
other animals.
Everything interdependent.
So now, according
to that reality,
we have to take care about the
whole world and environment.
>> We are internally
related to everything,
not externally related.
Consciousness is an internal
relationship to the whole.
We take in the whole and
we act toward the whole.
And that, in turn,
whatever we have taken in
determines, basically,
what we are.
>> When we pass through some
sort of forest, no bird,
we feel something missing.
When we're passing through
some birds singing,
some birds flying,
then we feel more full.
So that's now the reality.
So interdependency
on that level.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Bohm's model of the implicate
and explicate I think is
talking about how the
subject/object split,
duality emerges from a ground,
which Lao Tzu would call
the Dao, which is non-subject,
non-object, but a unity,
a wholeness.
>> Ancient Indians only
used mind or wisdom,
and sometimes meditation.
No instrument.
No modern science.
Use instrument.
>> Science is whatever
people make of it.
You see, science has
changed over the ages,
and it's different now from
a few hundred years ago,
and it could be different again.
Now, there's no intrinsic reason
why science must necessarily
be measurement.
This is another
historical development
which has come about over
the past few centuries.
It's entirely contingent,
and not absolutely necessary.
>> So far, we know this much.
Still limitless the reality we
have to sort of investigate.
So David Bohm, I think, really
something like open our mind.
So grateful.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In all the areas that he
worked in, he was constantly
pushing, pushing, pushing.
In physics, in dialogue,
in consciousness.
>> He became a
scientist, I believe,
in order to benefit humanity.
I think his mission
was always leading up
to a transformation
for human society,
overcoming the fragmentation
that we experience
towards having the experience
of a new interconnectedness
among us all to solve
problems together,
overcoming the divisions.
So in that sense, he
represented a truly holistic,
integrated vision
of a human being.
And I think as that,
he can serve as a model
for future generations.
>> It's a revolution.
It has radical implication
about how we live our life,
how we interact
with the Earth, how
we interact with each other.
And that revolution
is unfinished.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we aspire to go beyond our
present state of consciousness,
if we truly want to be happier,
to love and know ourselves
better, to regain
meaning and wholeness,
the old disciplines only
serve to deepen the illusion
of manifest reality.
We must look beyond
the veil of form
to a realization of oneness
present in you, in me,
the universe, and everything.
When you grasp,
this it will put you
on the threshold of what is
real and your place in reality.
Reality is wholeness,
undivided wholeness.
And this fact has yet to
dawn on billions of people.
[MUSIC PLAYING]